---
layout: post
title: How did it all begin
share: true
excerpt: "We need to go back ..... Oh way back. You see I did my undergraduate degree in Political Science and was focused on foreign relations. I worked a few years in Washington DC and then discovered the world of Cyber Security [...]"
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/howitallstarted.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(255, 0, 0, 0.5)
  caption: "Photo credit: [**Michael Galde**](http://apt-get-sudo.com)"
  cta_label: "Political Science?"
  cta_url: "https://www.unomaha.edu/college-of-arts-and-sciences/political-science/"
---

We need to go back ..... Oh way back. You see I did my undergraduate degree in Political Science and was focused on foreign relations. I worked a few years in Washington DC and then discovered the world of Cyber Security. To get a feeling of where everything started from I am posting some of my written works. More as a test of configuring this blog but also as a way to show myself of how far I have come.

Please join me, encourage me and above all else correct me.

# Effectiveness of United States Foreign Policy in Saudi Arabia


## Introduction

United States foreign policy in Saudi Arabia has varied drastically since the commencement of diplomatic relations in 1932. The effectiveness of United States foreign policy has ranged from periods of highly positive relations to periods of conflict and instability. From the discovery of oil in the deserts of Saudi Arabia and the growing global demand for petroleum-based products, the relationship between the United States and Saudi Arabia has adjusted over time. As priorities change within each country, the relationship has adapted dynamically.
This paper will examine the United States approach to foreign policy in Saudi Arabia and analyze the effectiveness of the American approach during three distinct time periods. The first time period encompasses the inception of diplomatic relations in the 1930s up until the 1970s. This first period is characterized by an effective, commercially driven strategy in United States foreign policy that led to strong economic ties between the two countries. The second period begins with the oil embargo of the 1970s and includes the Gulf War. This second period represents the lowest period in the relationship and constituted the most negative relations the countries have had up to the present date. The third period includes the attacks of September 11, 2001 and relations in the post 9/11 era up to the present. This period represents an era of cooperation between the two countries. In particular, the third period has shown Saudi Arabia yielding increased influence in the relationship.  The final section of this paper sets forth predictions for potential directions the relationship may take in the future.

### 1         Establishment of Diplomatic and Commercial Relationship (1932-1970)

#### 1.1       Background and History

The United States and Saudi Arabia established official diplomatic relations in 1933 (Al-Rasheed 2010). Prior to that date, the international community did not formally recognize Saudi Arabia as a country (Al-Rasheed 2010). After Saudi Arabia gained recognition from other countries, the United States established formal diplomatic ties (Al-Rasheed 2010).
During this period, Saudi Arabia lacked infrastructure, exports, natural resources, military forces, or meaningful industry (Metz et al. 1993). While Saudi Arabia had considerable influence within the Middle East due to the location of Mecca and Medina within its borders, the country still had a weak economy and limited development (Metz et al. 1993). A private American company was providing assistance in locating water resources for the Saudi government (Americo 2006). In the process of searching for water resources, the expedition discovered what would later be determined the world’s largest supply of oil (Clark et al. 2006).
The discovery of oil in Saudi Arabia laid the groundwork that would lead to the formation of strong commercial ties between private American companies and the Saudi government (Lai and Morey 2006). The United States was interested in procuring a steady supply of petroleum, and Saudi Arabia was interested in obtaining financial resources to develop the country (Clark et al. 2006). Although other countries were also interested in Saudi petroleum, the terms offered by American companies in contract negotiations were more favorable than other countries such as Great Britain (Metz et al. 1993). Under the initial commercial arrangements, American companies provided the infrastructure to drill the petroleum and the Saudi Arabian government received a share of the profits (Metz et al. 1993). The consistent supply of Saudi Arabian petroleum allowed the United States to begin a shift towards a petroleum-based economy (United States Committee on Foreign Relations 1995).
The California Arabian Standard Oil Company was formed in 1933 as a joint United States and Saudi Arabian company (Clark et al. 2006). Initially, the United States companies had a controlling share of the company, with Saudi Arabia having a voice in the process but lacking veto power (Clark et al. 2006). United States companies provided the equipment and personnel to execute drilling and exploration operations in exchange for access to Saudi Arabian oil resources (Metz et al. 1993). This venture led to substantial economic benefits for both the Saudi Arabian government and private American companies (Clark et al. 2006). The name of the company was changed to the Arabian American Oil Company (“ARAMCO”) in 1944 (Clark et al. 2006). ARAMCO began as a private company owned jointly by United States and Saudi companies, but was later nationalized by the Saudi government during the oil embargo of the 1970s (Clark et al. 2006).

#### 1.2       Analysis

Friendly ties and mutual commercial interests characterized the United States foreign policy in Saudi Arabia during the period from 1932 up until the 1970s (Kaarbo 1998).  For example, the United States government was instrumental in brokering commercial deals between American and Saudi companies that led to the procurement of a secure supply of petroleum for the United States (Clark et al. 2006). This secure supply of petroleum was a significant factor in the growth of the United States economy, causing the United States to seek a strong and positive relationship with Saudi Arabia (Riddell 2008). Although Saudi Arabia was not a democratic nation, and was culturally very different from the United States, America’s strong economic interest in the Saudi oil supply formed the basis for a strong political relationship (Metz et al. 1993).
United States foreign policy in Saudi Arabia during this period was highly effective for several reasons. First, the United States foreign policy of promoting and brokering deals between Saudi Arabian and American companies provided substantial economic benefits for both American and Saudi companies (Clark et al. 2006). This built a positive view of America, and particularly American companies in the eyes of the Saudis (Clark et al. 2006). Second, the United States foreign policy during this period led to the procurement of a steady supply of petroleum, which helped grow the American economy (United States Committee on Foreign Relations 1995). Third, United States foreign policy during this time allowed the Americans to cultivate a strategic relationship with a strong ally in the Middle East (Lai and Morey 2006). This strong relationship was even more valuable because Saudi Arabia became the economic powerhouse of the region within a short period of time (Metz et al. 1993). Fourth, United States foreign policy during this time allowed America to become the primary global purchaser of petroleum (United States Committee on Foreign Relations 1995). Fifth, United States foreign policy during this time resulted in Saudi Arabia dealing primarily with the United States in the sale of its petroleum supply, effectively pre-empting other foreign governments from the opportunity to build a similar relationship (Metz et al. 1993). Overall, this period represents the highlight of the United States-Saudi Arabian relationship and could be described as a golden age between the two countries.

### 2         Oil Embargo and Gulf War

#### 2.1       Background and History

## A.         OPEC Oil Embargo

The oil embargo of the 1970s represents a turning point in United States-Saudi Arabian relations (Cooper 2011). The events leading up to the oil embargo are relatively complicated and implicate regional politics, but are summarized here briefly for reference. Israel executed a program to extend the scope of its borders, leading to the eviction of significant numbers of the indigenous Palestinian population from their homes in the West Bank (Stookey 1975). These evictions angered the Muslim community, including Saudi Arabia (Stookey 1975). In 1973, a Coalition of Arab States including Saudi Arabia went to war against Israel in the Arab-Israeli war (Cooper 2011). The United States and several Western European countries supported Israel in the war, providing weapons, financial, and medical support to the Israelis (United States et al. 1974).

United States support for Israel in the Arab-Israeli War angered the Wahhabi tribe within Saudi Arabia (Al-Rasheed 2010). The Wahhabi tribe was historically important for the legitimacy of the ruling family of the Saudi Kingdom (Al-Rasheed 2010). The Wahhabi tribe had a pro-Islamic ideology, did not view Israel as legitimate, and was dissatisfied with Israel’s treatment of Muslim Palestinians (Metz et al. 1993). The ruling Saudi family was under pressure from the Wahhabi tribe to take action in response to United States support for Israel (Cooper 2011).  In response to this pressure, Saudi Arabia, through its position as the majority oil shareholder in OPEC, influenced OPEC to declare an oil embargo against the United States and Western Europe (Cooper 2011). Under the oil embargo, OPEC halted all oil sales to the United States (Cooper 2011).

The oil embargo was devastating to the United States, causing a recession, gasoline shortages, gas rations, and disruption in civic services (United States et al. 1995). In response to the oil embargo, the United States began investing in more diverse energy markets (United States et al. 1990). The United States also entered into negotiations with Saudi Arabia to reinstate the oil supply (Cooper 2011). In addition, the United States sought new suppliers of petroleum (United States et al. 1995).
The oil embargo resulted in an increase in global oil prices and a loss in Saudi Arabian oil revenues (United States et al. 1995). In response, Saudi Arabia eventually flooded the global market with cheap oil in order to depress prices and de-incentivize other suppliers from drilling (Cooper 2011). This ultimately ended the embargo and caused other OPEC countries to re-initiate the sale and purchase of petroleum supplies. In 1980, Saudi Arabia also took control over ARAMCO, acquiring a 100% stake in the company, effectively nationalizing the Saudi petroleum industry (Clark et al. 2006).
## B.         Gulf War

From 1980 to 1988, Iran and Iraq were engaged in a conflict known as the Iran-Iraq war (Ayoob 1983). During the Iran-Iraq war, both the United States and Saudi Arabia supported Iraq (Bzostek and Robison 2008). In supporting Iraq in the conflict, Iran was stymied in its efforts to spread its influence in the region and Saudi Arabia’s position as the most powerful country in the region was maintained (Cooper 2011). The Iran-Iraq war ended in 1988 with no clear winner when a U.N. resolution to cease-fire was agreed to by both sides (UN Security Council 1988).
After the Iran-Iraq war, Iraq was in debt to Kuwait for money loaned during the conflict (Cooper 2011). Iraq was also in debt to Saudi Arabia for the same reason, but Saudi Arabia canceled the debt as a sign of support for Iraq in the conflict against Iran. The Iraqi mindset was that Iraq had defended the Arab world against the Iranian threat, and therefore, the Kuwaiti loans were provided to fight a war in which Kuwait had an interest (Cooper 2011). When Kuwait refused to forgive Iraq’s debt as Saudi Arabia had, Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1991 (Al-Rasheed 2010). Saudi Arabia found Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait as a threat to regional security and also a threat to Saudi Arabia’s economic and political position in the region, as Iraq and Kuwait combined would have an oil supply to rival that of Saudi Arabia’s (Alnasrawi 2006).

Saudi Arabia asked the United States to aid in a coalition against Iraq (Al-Rasheed 2010). The United States, as one of the only superpowers, had global support in building the coalition (Alnasrawi 2006). The United States established a successful coalition of Arab states against Iraq and ultimately defeated the Iraqi military, returning Kuwait to the Kuwaiti government (Alnasrawi 2006).

#### 2.2       Analysis

## A.         Oil Embargo

The oil embargo of the 1980s represents the most difficult period in the relationship between Saudi Arabia and the United States.  Prior to this point, United States foreign policy towards Saudi Arabia had been narrowly focused on establishing and maintaining strong commercial relations. With the commencement of the Arab-Israeli war, the United States was required to take a broader view of its relationships within the Middle East (Alnasrawi 2006).

After the Arab-Israeli war, the United States was under pressure from domestic, pro-Israeli lobbying groups to provide support to Israel (Pappe 2007). As tension grew within the Middle East, the United States was in a complicated position. If the United States refused to provide support to Israel, the United States would have lost influence in that country and risked domestic consequences. In addition, in withholding support for Israel, the United States would risk allowing the Soviet Union to increase influence in the region. While the United States recognized that supporting Israel would strain relations with Saudi Arabia, the American government could not risk the consequences of withholding support (Alnasrawi 2006).

Ultimately, the United States provided support to Israel in the form of money, loan guarantees, weapons, and medical support but did not put provide any American military support (Alnasrawi 2006). The reasons for this are several. First, the United States had previously engaged in other conflicts with limited success, including intervention in Vietnam and Korea. The United States did not want to risk a similar outcome by engaging militarily in Israel (Bar-Siman-Tov 1998). Second, although the United States did recognize that Saudi Arabia would dislike American support for Israel during the Arab-Israeli War, the United States underestimated the impact this would have on its relationship with Saudi Arabia. The United States believed that the pre-existing positive relationship and strong commercial ties with Saudi Arabia would help minimize the impact of United States support for Israel (United States et al. 1995). However, the Wahhabi outrage over United States support for Israel put the Saudi Arabian ruling family under pressure to take action to retaliate against the United States. This pressure led Saudi Arabia to react more aggressively to United States support for Israel than it otherwise would have (Al-Rasheed 2010).

United States policy towards Saudi Arabia during this period was largely ineffective. The United States did not predict Saudi Arabia’s aggressive reaction and the OPEC oil embargo against the United States. As a result, the relationship between the United States and Saudi Arabia was strained and unstable. Saudi Arabia was hurt by the drop in revenue without a buyer for its petroleum, and it lost some standing in the global economy as other oil-producing nations captured some of the oil market (Al-Rasheed 2010). The United States suffered a recession and was forced to implement petroleum rationing and seek out relationships with other petroleum suppliers. Relations remained strained until the United States took action in the Gulf War, which began to repair and improve the relationship with Saudi Arabia (United States et al. 1995).
## B.         Gulf War

The United States and Saudi Arabia renewed ties after termination of the OPEC oil embargo when they combined forces to shape regional politics in the Middle East by providing support to Iraq in the Iraq-Iran war. Saudi Arabia was motivated by a desire to counter Iranian influence within the Middle East. The United States was by a desire to maintain Saudi Arabia’s regional power (Alnasrawi 2006). The United States did not want Iran to spread its influence in the region because Iran’s population consists of a Shia Muslim majority. Increased Iranian influence in the Middle East would have caused intense disruption, as the Gulf Countries were generally controlled by a Sunni political majority (Alnasrawi 2006). Similarly, the United States did not want Iraq to spread its influence in the region because Iraq was pushing for increased Arab nationalism amongst Middle Eastern countries. Increased Arab nationalism could dilute Saudi Arabia’s power within the region, an outcome the United States did not find favorable to its long term goals for the region. As America did not want either Iraq or Iran to prevail in the Iran-Iraq War, the United States provided support to both countries in order to prolong the conflict and weaken both sides. This approach would help to preserve Saudi Arabia’s stance within the region (United States et al. 1995).

United States foreign policy during the Iran-Iraq war was a successful campaign towards stabilizing Saudi Arabia’s power within the region. The United States wanted to strengthen the relationship with Saudi Arabia that had been damaged by the Arab-Israeli war, and United States support for Iraq alongside Saudi Arabia helped improve relations. The United States also wanted to prevent either Iran or Iraq from diminishing Saudi Arabia’s influence, and in providing United States support to both Iran and Iraq during this period, the United States prevented either country from gaining power (Alnasrawi 2006). Overall, United States foreign policy at this time was effective in promoting the American interest in preserving Saudi Arabia’s position within the region (United States et al. 1991).

After the conclusion of the Iran-Iraq war, Iraq sought to obtain forgiveness of debt acquired during the war from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Saudi Arabia forgave the loans but Kuwait refused. Iraq’s position was that Kuwait also needed protection from Iranian aggression in the region, and therefore Kuwait should forgive the debt to Iraq. Upon Kuwait’s refusal, Iraq positioned troops in order to invade Kuwait. Iraq informed the United States of its intention to invade Kuwait. The United States did not provide a clear directive of the consequences that would result if Iraq moved forward with its plans to invade Kuwait (Alnasrawi 2006). Iraq interpreted the United States response as an indication that the consequences would be minimal. Iraq then invaded Kuwait in 1991, which caused Saudi Arabia to seek United States intervention in the conflict (United States et al. 1991).  If Iraq were to capture Kuwait, the oil fields under Iraqi control would rival the oil supplies of Saudi Arabia, causing destabilization in the region. The United States used its influence in the international community to mobilize a coalition of armies to intervene against Iraq and liberate Kuwait to its previous government.

The United States intervened in the conflict between Iraq and Kuwait for several reasons. First, failure to intervene in the conflict would have resulted in Iraq securing an oil supply comparable to that of Saudi Arabia’s (Alnasrawi 2006). The American relationship with Iraq at this time was strained due to American support for Iran during the Iran-Iraq war, and the United States was concerned about the implications of increased Iraqi control over petroleum. Second, the United States had only recently improved its relationship with Saudi Arabia and did not want to risk damaging that relationship by ignoring Saudi Arabian requests for support in the conflict (United States et al. 1991).

United States policy in Saudi Arabia during this time was generally effective at strengthening ties with Saudi Arabia and within the region. In forming the coalition, Saudi Arabia was able to appear powerful against the Iraqis. The Coalition was extremely successful in defeating the Iraqis and the victory was generally perceived as an Arab victory rather than an exclusively American one. In addition, United States policy during the Gulf War helped American commercial interests and increased goodwill towards the United States throughout the region. The increase in goodwill was especially important due to the damage done to American/Arab relations as a result of United States support for Israel in the Arab-Israeli War.  The United States relationship with Saudi Arabia again returned to a positive stance, and United States commercial interests in a secure petroleum supply were protected (Bzostek and Robison 2008).

### 3         September 11, 2001 to Present

#### 3.1       History and Background

Tensions between the United States and Saudi Arabia became grew after the attacks of 9/11, as the majority of the hijackers on a9/11 were Saudi nationals. It was later discovered that the attacks on 9/11 were orchestrated by Osama bin Laden and that he selected Saudi nationals in a deliberate effort to destabilize relations between Saudi Arabia and the United States (United States et al. 2001).  Travel between the United States and Saudi Arabia became more restricted as the United States rescinded previous policies that permitted easier access to American visas. The United States re-evaluated its relationship with the Middle East and Saudi Arabia and initiated a campaign against fanatical groups in the country of Afghanistan, a move that was supported by Saudi Arabia and the majority of the Arab world (United States et al. 2001).

In 2003, the United States began a military campaign in Iraq, which the Arab world did not view favorably. This strained United States relations with the Middle East, and even globally as the United States acted without U.N. support in the military intervention in Iraq. The United States military campaign in Iraq also strained United States relations with Saudi Arabia, as Saudi Arabia made public statements condemning United States military intervention in Iraq (Rousseau and Jamil 2010).

The United States began the movement of troops out of Iraq in 2009 (Solis et al. 2009). Because the United States was leaving the region, the United States sought to mitigate the risk of regional instability by supplying Saudi Arabia with planes, helicopters, weapons, military training for the entire Saudi Arabian military, and assistance with construction of military bases to United States specifications. The United States sought to establish “interoperability” to enable the United States military to work efficiently with the Saudi military (Reuters 2010). The United States also sought to prepare Saudi Arabia to defend against potential adversaries that might threaten United States interests, including Iran and Iraq for example. As a result of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts and the provision of United States military technology and training, a foundation has been set for Saudi Arabia to take a role of greater strength and increasing influence within the region.

#### 3.2       Analysis

The United States-Saudi Arabian relationship has been shifting from a period of acting jointly to a relationship wherein the United States views Saudi Arabia as a strategic asset in maintaining stability in the Arab world. In a way, the United States would like for Saudi to act independently, but as a proxy for the United States interests in the region. The United States has sought to engage with Saudi Arabia in a way that establishes legitimacy for United States actions. For example, the United States seeks to use its relationship with Saudi Arabia to influence other Arab nations to allow the United States freedom of movement in advancing its goals within the region. While the relationship has shifted from one of clear joint action (for example, in the Gulf War in 1991) towards one of more subtle cooperation, it is clear that Saudi Arabia remains an essential strategic ally for the United States in the Middle East.
While the United States has had a policy of using its relationship with Saudi Arabia to help legitimize the American campaign in Iraq, this policy has not been very effective over time. Initially, Saudi Arabia supported the United States campaign in Iraq, but eventually its support dwindled over time. The United States campaign in Iraq became very unpopular in the United States and within the Middle East, making it difficult for Saudi Arabia to continue to support the United States on this critical issue.  Overall, this period represents neither the high point nor the low point in the relationship, but somewhere in between as both countries seek to re-define the relationship in light of shifts in the global energy market and regional politics.
A potential issue that would have a significant impact on the relationship between the United States and Saudi Arabia is the American relationship with Iran. After a long period of no diplomatic relationship with Iran, the United States relationship with Iran has been under negotiation. While it is not apparent what the outcome of these negotiations will be, it is clear that the re-establishment of a relationship between Iran and the United States would have major consequences in the American relationship with Saudi Arabia. As Saudi Arabia has an interest in maintaining its dominance in the region (economically, politically, and militarily), it is unlikely that Saudi Arabia would view increased Iranian influence within the region as a favorable development. The United States will need to navigate this issue carefully in order to maintain friendly relations with Saudi Arabia.

### 4         Future Direction

Based on the forgoing description and analysis of the United States-Saudi Arabian relationship over the last 80 years, several factors emerge as consistently important in shaping the dynamic relationship. From the United States perspective, the important factors include the American economic interest in establishing and maintaining a consistent petroleum supply as well as the interest in preserving Saudi Arabia’s regional dominance. From the Saudi Arabian perspective, the important factors include preserving the legitimacy of the ruling family by appeasing the populace (including the influential Wahhabi tribe), stabilizing a profitable level of economic output, and maintaining its position as a leader in regional politics.

Keeping these factors in mind, three predictions for the United States-Saudi Arabia relationship going forward are offered. First, Saudi Arabia’s economic importance as an oil exporter to the United States is likely to diminish in the future. Second, the United States is likely to maintain Saudi Arabia as a strong regional United States ally in an attempt to minimize the need for future American involvement in the region. This will allow the United States to focus more on developing ties and relationships with East Asia. Third, the United States-Saudi Arabian economic relationship is likely to shift from a primarily energy-based relationship to a military supply contract based relationship. The following paragraphs further elaborate on each of these predictions.

The first prediction about the relationship going forward is that Saudi Arabia’s economic importance as an oil exporter to the United States is currently diminishing and this trend is expected to continue.


The United States has been increasing domestic oil production in order to achieve oil independence from a historically unstable and unpredictable market as shown in figure 1. The United States is expected to surpass Saudi Arabia in oil production by 2016 (Rosenthal 2012). This change will systematically make the petroleum-based commercial aspect of the United States-Saudi Arabian less important, while increasing the importance of the regional security aspect and military-based commercial aspects of the relationship.
The second prediction for the relationship is that the United States is likely to seek to maintain Saudi Arabia as a strong regional United States ally in order to limit the need for future American involvement in the region (Reuters 2013).  For example, initial American attempts to handle the conflict in Syria were not supported by the American people, and it is unlikely that the United States would seek to engage militarily in the Middle East for anything other than absolutely critical reasons. The American desire to avoid further entanglements in the region suggests that Saudi Arabia will continue to be an important strategic ally for the United States in the Middle East.
The third prediction is that the United States-Saudi Arabian economic relationship is likely to shift from its current focus on energy to emphasize military supply contracts. For example, in 2010, the United States entered into an agreement to sell over $60 billion in military equipment and training to Saudi Arabia. This comes at a time when the United States is simultaneously shifting away from direct engagement in the Middle Eastern region and also seeking energy independence.  While the relationship will most likely continue to de-emphasize the importance of oil, this does not suggest that the economic relationship will cease or decline. The Saudi Arabian interest in developing its military, as well as the American interest in supplying its military technology and training suggest that the countries will continue to have strong economic ties even as petroleum becomes less important to the commercial relationship.

# Conclusion

United States foreign policy in Saudi Arabia has been shaped by two primary spheres of influence.  The first sphere relates to Saudi Arabia’s strategic importance to the United States due to its position within the Middle East. The second sphere relates to the commercial aspects of the relationship and the American interest in the Saudi petroleum supply. As regional politics have shifted, the strategic importance of Saudi Arabia has affected how the United States approached the country and the region as a whole. Similarly, changes in the global economy and the terms of the economic dealings between the two countries have impacted the relationship. Overall, the United States has adapted its policies towards Saudi Arabia, as generally driven by the interests of the strategic alliance sphere and the commercial sphere.  In the future, the relationship is likely to continue in a state of flux, much as it has over the last 80 years. What is expected to remain consistent, however, is the American willingness to develop effective policies that will preserve the commercial relationship and the strategic alliance.



So what do you think... I can think of a few places that I went a little off, this was a few years ago but this is where everything kind of started from. We can never forget these areas.
